Title: Foreign relations of Montenegro

In a referendum on 21 May 2006, the people of Montenegro opted to leave the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. This result was confirmed with a declaration of independence by the Montenegrin parliament on 3 June 2006. It simultaneously requested international recognition and outlined foreign policy goals. Montenegro's primary foreign policy objectives were initially to join the United Nations (2006) and the military alliance NATO (2017). It has since been focused on multilateral trade as well as its efforts to join the European Union.
Russia gave official recognition on 11 June 2006, and was the first permanent member of the United Nations Security Council to do so. The European Council of Ministers recognized Montenegrin independence on 12 June, as did the United States. The United Kingdom extended recognition on 13 June. The last two permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, France and the People's Republic of China recognised the government of Montenegro on 14 June.


Membership in international organizations

On June 28, 2006, Montenegro was added to the American Radio Relay League's DXCC List as the 336th entry based on membership in the UN.


Diplomatic relations
List of countries which Montenegro maintains diplomatic relations with:


Canada relations
Canadian Foreign Minister Peter MacKay wrote to Foreign Minister Miodrag Vlahović extending diplomatic recognition and agreeing to hold discussions on the establishment of diplomatic relations, which occurred later in 2007.
The Canadian Embassy in Belgrade is accredited to Montenegro.


China relations

The establishment of diplomatic relations between the People's Republic of China and the Republic of Montenegro was confirmed on 14 June 2006.
China transformed its consulate into an embassy in Podgorica on July 7, 2006. The Montenegrin embassy in China opened in Beijing on November 13, 2007.
In 2015, total trade between the two countries amounted to 160,385,964 euros.


Russia relations

Initially strong from 2006, relations slipped from 2010 as Montenegro has looked westward, with Montenegro joining international sanctions in 2014 following the Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation. The failed Russian military coup in October 2016 aiming to stop Montenegro seeking NATO membership was a turning point. Despite Russian investment into Montenegro, joining the EU became a key goal of Montenegro.
Russia continues to spy on Montenegro, GRU officer Igor Zaytsev is known to have travelled to Montenegro on numerous occasions up to 2018, bring in encryption equipment to give to existing or potential agents, including allegedly former Foreign Ministry spokesperson Radomir Sekulović.
Russia's invasion of Ukraine in 2022 drove relationships down further, with five diplomats expelled in March/April 2022 then six more Russian diplomats being expelled from Montenegro for alleged spying, in September, with Russia then closing its consulate in Podgorica.
In August 2023 Montenegro refused to extradite Dmitry Senin, a former Russian FSB Colonel who had fled Russia in 2017 and had been granted asylum.


Turkey relations

Montenegro established diplomatic relations with Turkey on 3 July 2006.

Montenegro maintains an embassy in Ankara and an consulate-general in Istanbul.
Turkey maintains an embassy in Podgorica.
Both nations are members of the Council of Europe and NATO. Both countries are candidates for the European Union.


United Kingdom relations

Montenegro established diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom on 13 June 2006.

Montenegro maintains an embassy in London.
The United Kingdom is accredited to Montenegro through its embassy in Podgorica.
Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


United States relations

The United States recognized the Republic of Montenegro on June 12, 2006, being among the first states to do so. Diplomatic relations between the two countries were established on August 15, and have since rapidly developed. On August 28, six U.S. Senators, John McCain (R-AZ), Saxby Chambliss (R-GA), Mel Martinez (R-FL), Lindsey Graham (R-SC), Richard Burr (R-NC) and John E. Sununu (R-NH), made an official visit to Montenegro. Their activities included a meeting with President Vujanović and with the speaker of the Montenegrin parliament.
Soon after the congressional visit, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld paid an official visit to Montenegro, seeking support for the War on Terror and overall American geopolitical goals in Europe. Following the Secretary's meeting with Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Đukanović, it was announced that Montenegro had agreed in principle to aid the US efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan, although no specific pledges of aid were made.


See also
Accession of Montenegro to the European Union
Foreign relations of Serbia and Montenegro
List of Ambassadors from Montenegro
List of Ambassadors to Montenegro
List of diplomatic missions in Montenegro
List of diplomatic missions of Montenegro
Montenegro in intergovernmental organizations
Montenegro–NATO relations
Foreign relations of Yugoslavia


References


External links
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Montenegro Archived 2012-10-25 at the Wayback Machine
Embassies and consulates in and of Montenegro
Embassy of the United States of America in Podgorica
The Njegoskij Fund Network: Foreign Representations in Montenegro
The Njegoskij Fund Network: Montenegrin Representations Abroad
The Njegoskij Fund Network: Today's Montenegro: Diplomacy