Title: Bahut Din Huwe

Bahut Din Huwe (transl. Many days have passed) is a 1954 Indian Hindi-language film directed by S. S. Vasan, produced by Gemini Studios and starring Madhubala. It is a remake of the Telugu film Bala Nagamma (1942).
Bahut Din Huwe received lukewarm reviews from critics upon its release in March 1954. The film was not a commercial success, although it went on to celebrate a silver jubilee in Poona.


Plot
Madhubala plays the role of Princess Chandrakanta, who is born due to the blessings of Nagraj. Due to Nagraj's curse, the Queen dies as soon as the princess stops breastfeeding. The second Queen grows jealous of the princess and orders her men to kill her. However, they leave her in the forest, where she gets adopted by a priest and his wife, who ill-treats her. When she grows up, she is spotted by Prince Anand Kumar, who immediately falls in love with her. She marries him and gives birth to a son. An evil and lustful magician king, Bhadra Chamund, decides to marry Chandrakanta when he discovers that she is the most beautiful woman in the world. Disguising himself as a saint, he and goes to her palace to beg for alms and kidnaps her. When Prince Anand Kumar finds out, he marches to Bhadra Chamund's kingdom with his army to defeat him, but The Prince and the army are turned to stone by his magic.
Years later, Chandrakanta and Vijaykumar's son, Prince  Vijay Kumar (Rattan Kumar), who is brought up by the palace servants, learns the truth about his parents and resolves to free them. He reaches Bhadra Chamund's kingdom with his servant Tarang Sen (Agha) and impresses him by presenting a garland. Fooling the guards, he enters the jail and finally meets his mother Chandrakanta. Chandrakanta tells him that across seven mountains and a dark cave lies a five-coloured parrot, in which Bhadra Chamund has stored his soul. He sets upon this dangerous journey to the faraway land Mayanagari, faces several obstacles like women who try to hypnotise him by playing the veena, and encounters magical illusions like a garden containing talking animals.


Cast
Madhubala as Chandrakanta
Rattan Kumar as Vijayakumar
Swaraj as Prince Anand Kumar
Agha as Tarang Sen
Kailash as Bhadra Chamund
Savitri as Mohini
Pushpavalli as Bhulakshmi Devi
Gulab as Flower Woman
Kanhaiyalal as Pujari
Lalita Pawar as Ekadasi
Suryaprabha as Young Queen
Neela as Mala
Baby Saraswati as Young Chandra
M. K. Radha as The King
Roy Chowdhury as Nagaraj
Indira Acharya as Maid
Thousands of Gemini Boys and Girls


Production
Bahut Din Huwe is a remake of the Telugu film Bala Nagamma (1942), and marked Savitri's debut in Hindi cinema. Shooting took place at Madras.


Songs
"Saiyaan Tere Prem Ki Diwaani Ban Aai Hun" – Lata Mangeshkar
"Ammaa Ammaa Tu Kahaan Gai Amma" – Lata Mangeshkar
"Gajaananam, He Ganesh Gananaayak" – Lata Mangeshkar
"Vinaa Meri Aashaa Bhari, Kyun Chameli Khilakhilaati Hai Bata" – Lata Mangeshkar
"Mai Hu Rup Ki Rani" – Lata Mangeshkar
"Chanda Chamke Nil Gagan Mrunal" – Lata Mangeshkar


References


External links
Bahut Din Huwe at IMDb