Title: Names of the Levant

Over recorded history, there have been many names of the Levant, a large area in the Near East, or its constituent parts. These names have applied to a part or the whole of the Levant. On occasion, two or more of these names have been used at the same time by different cultures or sects. As a natural result, some of the names of the Levant are highly politically charged. Perhaps the least politicized name is Levant itself, which simply means "where the sun rises" or "where the land rises out of the sea", a meaning attributed to the region's easterly location on the shore of the Mediterranean Sea.


Antiquity


Retjenu
Ancient Egyptian texts (c. 14th century BC) called the entire coastal area along the Mediterranean Sea between modern Egypt and Turkey rṯnw (conventionally Reṯenu). In the Amarna letters, written in Akkadian cuneiform, Reṯenu is subdivided into five regions:

kꜣnꜥnꜥ (Kanana), i.e. Canaan proper (Idumea, Judea, Samaria);
pꜣ-kꜣnꜥnꜥ (pa-Kanana), city of Gaza; name used in reference to being the administrative centre of Canaan.
Ḏahy (ḏꜣhy;Ṯahi, Ḏahi), roughly Galilee and coastal plain to Ashkelon dominated by Hazor;
Rmnn, coast of Lebanon;
Amurru, (the Amurru kingdom of the Amorites);
Kharu (ḥꜣrw), the chief city of which was Ugarit.


Canaan
Akkadian: 𒆳𒆠𒈾𒄴𒈾 (Kinaḫnu)
Arabic: کَنْعَان [kanʕaːn]
Phoenician: 𐤊𐤍𐤏𐤍 (Knʿn)
Greek: Χαναάν or Χνᾶ (Khanaán or Khna)
Hebrew
Israeli Hebrew: כנען [ˈkna.an]
Tiberian Hebrew: כְּנַעַן [kʰaˈnaːʕaːn]
Latin: Canaan
Persian: کنعان (Kænaan)
Ugaritic: 𐎋𐎐𐎓𐎐 (Knʿn)
Turkish: Kenan
Prior to (and for some time after) the formation of the Israelite/Hebrew identity and polities in the region, the land was referred to natively as Canaan (first attested in Assyrian Akkadian as Kinaḫnu). Though it was once thought that the Hebrews were foreign settlers in Canaan, the modern consensus of most scholars is that Hebrew identity developed in situ as a direct indigenous evolution of earlier Canaanite tribes; the continuity from Bronze Age Canaanite civilization to Iron Age Israelite/Judean civilization is indeed so seamless that many scholars stress that any dichotomy between the two is essentially arbitrary—with culture, language, etc., being indistinguishable during the transition from Bronze Age to Iron Age. The Phoenicians—also descended from the Bronze Age Canaanites, and close relatives and neighbors of the Israelites—likewise continued to speak a Canaanite language and practice Canaanite religion at their Mediterranean ports, and referred to themselves natively as "Canaanites", and their land as "Canaan".


Phoenicia

Arabic: فِيْنِيْقِيَّة [fiːniːqjaː]
Greek: Φοινίκη (Phoiníkē)
Hebrew
Israeli Hebrew: פיניקיה (Feniqiyah or Finiqiyah)
Latin: Phœnicia
Turkish: Fenike
In ancient times, the Greeks called the whole of Canaan Phoiníkē, literally "[land] of the purple[-producing shell]". Today, general consensus associates the Phoenician homeland proper with the Eastern Mediterranean coast, which includes coastal Syria, modern-day Lebanon, and Israel. Notable Phoenician cities include Ugarit, Tyre, Sidon, and Byblos. Also, there is a modern town in Turkey called Finike which is thought to have derived by the Lycians who traded with Phoenicians in ancient times.


Israel and Judea

Israel:

Egyptian: ysrỉꜣr (/iːsriɑr/)
Arabic: إِِِسْرَائِيْل [ʔisraːʔiːl]
Canaanite: 𐤉𐤔𐤓𐤀𐤋 (yšrʾl)
Greek: Ισραήλ (Israḗl)
Hebrew
Israeli Hebrew: ישראל (Yisrael)
Tiberian Hebrew: יִשְׂרָאֵל [jisrɔˈʔeːl]
Biblical Hebrew: 𐤉𐤔𐤓𐤀𐤋 [jɪɬɾaːˈʔeːl]
Latin: Israël
Turkish: İsrail
Middle Persian: Adēr / Adēl
Persian: اسراییل (Esrajil)
Judea:

Arabic: یَهُوْدَا [jahuːdaː]
Akkadian: 𒅀𒌑𒁕𒀀𒀀 (ia-u2-da-a-a)
Greek: Ἰουδαία (Ioudaía)
Hebrew
Israeli Hebrew: יהודה (Yehuda)
Tiberian Hebrew: Yəhūḏā
Persian: یهودیه (Jæhudije / Jæhudija)
Turkish: Yahudi
Latin: Judæa
The kingdoms of Israel and Judah were Iron Age Semitic nations spanning from Edom to Assyria. Today, the modern State of Israel controls much of the former territory of the ancient Israelite/Judean kingdoms. According to the Deuteronomic history in the Bible, the polities of Israel and Judah originally split off from an earlier, united Kingdom of Israel, ruled by illustrious kings such as David and Solomon; though modern archaeology, biblical scholarship, and historians are generally somewhat skeptical of the historicity of the alleged united monarchy of Israel, suggesting instead that the two kingdoms developed separately, with the southern kingdom of Judah probably dependent on the northern kingdom of Israel as a satellite state at first.
The term Judaea is used by historians to refer to the Roman province that extended over parts of the former regions of the Hasmonean and Herodian kingdoms. It was named after Herod Archelaus's ethnarchy of Judea of which it was an expansion, the name being derived from the earlier provincial designations Yehud Medinata (Achaemenid) and Yehud (Neo-Babylonian): all ultimately referring to the former Hebrew kingdom of Judah.


Assyria and Syria

During Persian rule of the Near East, the Greeks and Romans came to call the region "Syria", believed to have been named after Assyria and the Aramaic language they spread over the entire region. However, Herodotus used the combined name "Syria Palaistinē". "Greater Syria" refers to a larger area that is supported by some nationalists.
During the Syrian Wars between the Seleucid dynasty and the Ptolemaic dynasty (274-168 BC), the region was known as Coele-Syria traditionally given the meaning 'hollow' Syria. The later Hellenistic term Koile Syria that appears first in Arrian's Anabasis Alexandri (2.13.7) in AD 145 and has been much discussed, is usually interpreted as a transcription of Aramaic kul, "all, the entire", identifying all of Syria.


Palestine

Palestine:

Arabic: فِلِسْطِيْن [filistˤiːn]
Greek: Παλαιστίνη (Palaistinē) - from Hebrew: פְּלִשְׁתִּים [pəliːʃˈtiːm]; or perhaps Greek παλαιστής (palaistēs, "wrestler"), in reference to Israel
Hebrew
Israeli Hebrew: פלשתינה (Palestina) – from Latin, English etc., or Israeli Hebrew: פלסטין (Falastin) – from Arabic.
Persian: فلسطین (Felestin)
Latin: Palæstina - same word as Philistia
Turkish: Filistin
An early version of the name Palestine was first recorded by the ancient Egyptians as Peleset. Herodotus later called the whole area Syria Palaistinē in his Histories (c. 450 BC), and included the entire territory of ancient Israel and Judea (which he noted for the practice of circumcision), not specifically the coastal Philistine territory (whose people notably did not practice circumcision). The Romans applied the term Syria Palaestina to the southern part of the region—beginning in AD 135, following the Bar Kokhba revolt—to complete the disassociation with the former identity of Judaea. The name continued to be used for the province throughout later Byzantine and Islamic rule.
Standard Hebrew has two names for Palestine, both of which are different from the Hebrew name for ancient Philistia. The first name Palestina was used by Hebrew speakers in the British Mandate of Palestine; it is spelled like the name for Philistia but with three more letters added to the end and a Latin pronunciation given. The second name Falastin is a direct loan from the Arabic form, and is used today specifically to refer to the modern Palestinians and to political aspirations for a Palestinian state.


Philistia
Philistia:

Canaanite: 𐤐𐤋𐤔𐤕 (p.l.ʃ.t)
Hebrew
Israeli Hebrew: פלשת (Pleshet)
Tiberian Hebrew: פְּלֶשֶׁת Hebrew pronunciation: [pəˈlɛʃɛθ]
Latin: Palæstina - from Greek


Eber-Nari and Transeuphratia
Eber-Nari was the name of a satrapy of the Achaemenid Empire which roughly corresponded with the southern Levant. It means "Beyond the River" or "Across the River" in both Akkadian and Aramaic (that is, the western side of the Euphrates from a Mesopotamian and Persian viewpoint). It is also sometimes referred to as Transeuphratia (French Transeuphratène) by modern scholars.


Medieval and modern history


Shaam
The Arabic name for the region of Levant is Shaam (Arabic: أَلشَّام, romanized: al-Shām) comes from the Arabic root meaning "left" or "north". After the Islamic conquest of the region, the term was applied to the Levant (Byzantine Syria).
In ancient times, Baalshamin or Ba'al Šamem (Imperial Aramaic: ܒܥܠ ܫܡܝܢ, romanized: Lord of Heaven(s)), was a Semitic sky-god in Canaan/Phoenicia and ancient Palmyra. However, the syllable "sham" in Baalshamin has nothing to do with the name shaam but is just by chance the middle syllable of the word for "sky", comparable to Hebrew שָׁמַיִם (shamayim).


Levant
Medieval Italians called the region Levante after its easterly location where the sun "rises"; this term was adopted from Italian and French into many other languages.


Outremer
Frankish Crusaders called the Levant Outremer in French, which means "overseas". In France, this general term was colloquially applied more specifically to the Levant because of heavy Frankish involvement in the Crusades and the foundation of the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem and other Latin settlements scattered throughout the area.


Eastern Mediterranean
Eastern Mediterranean is a term that denotes the lands or states geographically in the eastern, to the east of, or around the east of the Mediterranean Sea, or with cultural affinities to this region. The Eastern Mediterranean includes Cyprus, Syria, Lebanon, Palestine, Israel, and Jordan. The term Mediterranean derives from the Latin word mediterraneus, meaning "in the middle of earth" or "between lands" (medius, "middle, between" + terra, "land, earth"). This is on account of the sea's intermediary position between the continents of Africa and Europe.


Holy Land

In different languages:

Arabic: اَلْأَرْض الْمُقَدَّسَة (Al-Arḍ al-Muqaddasah in the Islamic holy book, the Quran)
Greek: Άγιοι Τόποι (Hagioi Topoi, modern Greek pronunciation: [aji topi]), literally: "Holy Places")
Hebrew: ארץ הקדש (Erets ha-Kodesh)
Latin: Terra Sancta
Turkish: Kutsal Topraklar
The Holy Land is a term used in Judeo-Christian tradition to refer to sacred sites of the Levant — such as Shiloh, Jerusalem, Bethlehem and Nazareth — but is also often used to refer to the Levant (and historical Canaan) as a whole.


See also
Names of Jerusalem
Near East


References


External links
Aharoni, Yohanan (1979), "Boundaries and Names", The Land of the Bible: A Historical Geography, Westminster John Knox Press, ISBN 9780664242664