Title: List of stewards of the Chiltern Hundreds

Appointment to the position of Crown Steward and Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds (or the Three Hundreds of Chiltern) is a procedural device to allow members of Parliament (MPs) to resign from the House of Commons of the United Kingdom. Since MPs are technically unable to resign their seats in the House of Commons, they must resort to a legal fiction. An appointment to an "office of profit under The Crown" disqualifies an individual from sitting as an MP. Although several offices were used in the past to allow MPs to resign, only the stewardships of the Chiltern Hundreds and the Manor of Northstead are in present use.


Resignation

On 2 March 1624, a resolution was passed by the House of Commons making it illegal for an MP to quit or wilfully give up their seat. Believing that officers of the Crown could not remain impartial, the House passed a resolution on 30 December 1680 stating that an MP who "shall accept any Office, or Place of Profit, from the Crown, without the Leave of this House ... shall be expelled [from] this House." However, MPs were able to hold Crown Stewardships until 1740, when Sir Watkin Williams-Wynn was deemed to have vacated his Commons seat after becoming Steward of the Lordship and Manor of Bromfield and Yale. The practice of leaving the house when appointed as a minister of crown would result in a ministerial by-election until the early 20th century when this requirement was removed for most substantive offices.
The Chiltern Hundreds last needed a Crown Steward in the 18th century. When John Pitt wished to vacate his seat for Wareham in order to stand for Dorchester, the Crown Stewardship of the Chiltern Hundreds was available for this purpose. Pitt was appointed Crown Steward on 25 January 1751.
A number of other offices were subsequently used for resignation, but only the Chiltern Hundreds and the Crown Steward and Bailiff of the Manor of Northstead are still in use. Appointees to the Chiltern Hundreds are alternated with the Manor of Northstead, allowing two MPs to resign at once. When more than two MPs resign, such as the 1985 walkout of Ulster Unionist MPs, appointees are dismissed after a few hours to allow other resigning MPs to take their place. The Parliamentary Information Office has produced a list of those appointed to the office of Steward of the Chiltern Hundreds since 1850.


Key


Up to 1849


1850 to 1899


1900 to 1949


1950 to 1999


Since 2000


See also


Office still in use
List of stewards of the Manor of Northstead


Offices no longer in use
List of Stewards of the Manor of East Hendred
List of Stewards of the Manor of Hempholme
List of Stewards of the Manor of Old Shoreham
List of Stewards of the Manor of Poynings


References
General

Department of Information Services (24 March 2016). "MPs appointed to the Chiltern Hundreds or Manor of Northstead stewardships since the 1945 Parliament" (PDF). House of Commons Library. Retrieved 25 March 2016.
Specific