Title: Dickinson Independent School District

Dickinson Independent School District is a school district based in Dickinson, Texas, United States in Greater Houston.
DISD serves most of the city of Dickinson as well as portions of the cities of La Marque, League City, and Texas City and some houses in unincorporated Galveston County (including most of Bacliff and all of San Leon).
All of the DISD catchment area is also served by the College of the Mainland.
In 2009, the school district was rated "academically acceptable" by the Texas Education Agency.


History

In the 2000s, rising real estate costs in Galveston, alongside the devastation brought by Hurricane Ike, forced many families to move to other areas, including League City and Texas City. This meant an influx of children out of Galveston ISD and into other school districts like Dickinson ISD.


Standardized dress
All DISD students were required to wear "standardized dress", which is similar to school uniforms. [1]
In 2014 DISD did away with the standardized dress code.


Schools


Secondary schools
High schools
Dickinson High School [2] 9-12
Junior high schools
Dickinson Junior High (Texas City) 7-8
McAdams Junior High School (Dickinson) 7-8
Kranz Junior High School [3] Named after Gene Kranz former NASA flight director who is a longtime resident of the city. 7-8


Primary schools

Middle schools
Dunbar Middle School (Unincorporated Galveston County, Dickinson address) 5-6
John and Shamarion Barber Middle School (Dickinson) 5-6
Elementary schools
Bay Colony Elementary School (League City) grades PK-4
Hughes Road Elementary School (Dickinson) grades PK-4
Kenneth E. Little Elementary School (Unincorporated Galveston County, Bacliff address) grades PK-4
Jake Silbernagel Elementary School (Unincorporated Galveston County, Dickinson address) grades PK-4
San Leon Elementary School (Unincorporated Galveston County, Dickinson address) grades PK-4
Calder Road Elementary (League City, Texas) grades PK-4
Lobit Campus (Dickinson) grades PK-5 (opened August 2025) (The school was created from the consolidation of Lobit Elementary and Lobit Middle)


Alternative schools
Esmond Juvenile Justice Center Residential School - Jerry J. Esmond Juvenile Justice Center, Texas City


See also

List of school districts in Texas


References


External links

Official website