Title: Hajen som visste för mycket

Hajen som visste för mycket (The Shark Who Knew Too Much) is a 1989 Swedish comedy film directed by Claes Eriksson and the second to star the members of Galenskaparna och After Shave.


Plot
The rich builder Samuel Plottner (Claes Eriksson) catches on when his son Joakim (Anders Eriksson) write a newspaper article entitled "Eternit sheets makes you slimmer". The headline makes Eternit sheet manufacturer Davidsson & Locks shares skyrocket and everyone wants to know what Joakim knows.
Joakim claims that the whole thing was a printing error, the article was about cooking and that the title would be "Lasagna sheets makes you slimmer". But he also has a secret. He and his two brothers, Alexander and Lukas are really the same person, something that only he and their mother, Desiree knows.
The "shark" in the title is alluding to "finance sharks" (sly and dishonest business men).


Cast
Anders Eriksson as Joakim Plottner
Claes Eriksson as Samuel Plottner
Kerstin Granlund as Dixie Hopper
Jan Rippe as Helge Lock
Peter Rangmar as Lennart CumberlandasBrons
Per Fritzell as Benny Hörnsteen
Knut Agnred as Reverend Himmler
Håkan Johannesson as Jorgen Lycke
Charlotte Strandberg as Cilly CumberlandasBrons
Rolf Allan Håkansson as The Architect
Laila Westersund as The lady on the street
Charles Falk as High Guard


Tenacious trial
In 2007, a lingering lawsuit was settled regarding the film Hajen som visste för mycket. Claes Eriksson reported TV4 when they found advertising in his film without his permission. Eriksson won over TV4, but the TV channel continued appeal until the matter was taken up by the Supreme Court. Eriksson won even there when the court said that TV4 violated Claes Eriksson through commercials.


See also
Galenskaparna och After Shave
The movie soundtrack Hajen som visste för mycket


External links

Hajen som visste för mycket at IMDb
Hajen som visste för mycket at the Swedish Film Institute Database 
Kulturtuben – Hajen som visste för mycket
Hajen som visste för mycket på GAS-wikin Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine