Title: Kona Expressway

Kona Expressway (part of NH12) is a 7.2-kilometre-long (4.5 mi) limited access  expressway in West Bengal, India. It consists of a 6 laned elevated expressway corridor (under construction as of 2025) and 4-6 laned at-grade cum service road. The road acts as important link to Kolkata connecting National Highway 16 near Nibra to Vidyasagar Setu near Shibpur via Santragachi. It is one of the most important entries to Kolkata. As of November 2022, the road carries more 70,000 vehicles per day.


Route
Kona Expressway entirely lies in West Bengal, India and is owned and maintained by NHAI. The route was opened in 2001. Kona Expressway is significant since it is one of the three and major route to enter in Kolkata. The route goes through major areas like Carry road, which is the connector to Andul road, an important route of Howrah parallel to Kona Expressway. At Belepole, the Drainage Canal road connects with Kona Expressway, which is a major route to Howrah Maidan and Howrah-Amta road. Also the route acts as major connector to the areas like Santragachi, Jagacha, Gorpha, Belepole etc. Though the route is six lanes (four major lanes and two service roads) but it becomes two lanes on Santragachi over-bridge which crosses over Santragachi jheel and rail lines.
The route passes along two major inter-city railway junctions namely, Santragachi Junction railway station in Santragachi and Shalimar railway station near Vidyasagar Setu toll centre. Santragachi junction railway station is the third largest station in Kolkata Metropolitan area. Santragachi bus terminus is also along the route, which is used as inter-city bus terminus for Kolkata and long-distance buses. Kona Expressway serves as the route of buses like Barasat-Newtown-Santragachi, Barasat-Ultadanga-Santragachi, KB15 (Santragachi-Anandapur), EB1A (to Belgharia), VS12 (to New Town), K11 (Domjur - Rabindra Sadan), 26 (Mini) (Unsani - Esplanade), C11 (Domjur - B.B.D. Bagh/Belgachia), E6 (Amta - Esplanade), E7 (Bagnan - Esplanade) etc.
The route is a part of NH 12(NH117 before 2010) and a connector to NH 16(NH 6 before 2010).


References