Title: University of the Visayas

The University of the Visayas (UV) is a private institution located in Cebu City, Philippines. It is the first school in the province of Cebu to attain university status.


History
Vicente Gullas (1898–1970) founded the University of the Visayas in 1919 aiming to educate young people from average-income families. It was initially called the Visayan Institute, and occupied two rooms rented at the City Intermediate School. The number of students had increased from 37 in 1919 to 87 in 1920, and kept growing, but Gullas could not find a permanent building for the institute and kept moving over various locations in Cebu, borrowing auxiliary facilities from other schools nearby, such as physical education grounds of the Cebu Normal School and the public library near Fuente Osmeña. Finally, in 1946 the institute moved to its present site at Colon Street, and in 1948 received the university status.
In the 1980s–90s, the university added new master's degrees, in education, engineering, maritime studies, criminology and nursing. In 1994, four of the university programs were recognised by the Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities Commission on Accreditation. Earlier in 1994 the Gullas Medical Center and the College of Medicine were opened in Banilad.


Campuses and location
The university has seven campuses:

Main Campus along Colon Street, Cebu City
Pardo Campus along E. Sabellano St., Brgy. Poblacion Pardo, Cebu City
Banilad Campus/UV Gullas College of Medicine along Gov. Cuenco Ave., Brgy. Banilad, Mandaue City
Minglanilla Campus along N. Bacalso Ave.(Cebu South Road), Brgy. Pob Ward I, Minglanilla, Cebu
Compostela Campus along P. Cabatingan St., Brgy. Poblacion, Compostela, Cebu
Dalaguete Campus along Pedro Calungsod St., Brgy. Poblacion, Dalaguete, Cebu
Toledo Campus along S. Osmeña St., Brgy. Poblacion, Toledo City, Cebu

The College of Dentistry and Nursing is situated on a separate campus in Banilad, Mandaue City, alongside the Vicente Gullas Memorial Hospital and the Gullas College of Medicine. Previously, the Gullas College of Medicine (formerly known as Mandaue Academy) operated from a campus in downtown Cambaro, Mandaue City. As of 2025, the UV Gullas College of Medicine has been relocated to the Banilad campus; little to no known released information about the campus' closure. The former Cambaro site has since been demolished, to make way for a new Jollibee branch. 


Administration

President: Dr. Conrado E. Iñigo, Jr.
Vice President for Academic Affairs: Dr. Anna Lou C. Cabuenas
Vice President for Finance & QMS: Dr. Rosemarie Cruz- Español
Vice President for Administration: Mr. Elmer S. Ocaba


Notable alumni
Eduardo Gullas, politician
Elmer Cabahug (retired PBA player)
Arnulfo "Arnie" Tuadles✝ (retired PBA player)
Joaquin Rojas, MICAA and PBA basketball player
Greg Slaughter, PBA basketball player
Edgardo Labella, mayor of Cebu City
Nerissa Soon-Ruiz, councilor of Mandaue City, former Sixth District representative
Golden Cañedo, UV-Minglanilla, The Clash S1 Grand Champion
Vicente Duterte, politician and father of President Rodrigo Duterte


Gallery


See also
Medical education in the Philippines


References


External links
 Media related to University of the Visayas at Wikimedia Commons
Official website
University of the Visayas on Facebook
uvgullasmedicalcollege.com