Title: River (Miley Cyrus song)

"River" is a song by the American singer Miley Cyrus. It was released on March 13, 2023, through Columbia Records as the second single from Cyrus' eighth studio album Endless Summer Vacation (2023). It was written by Cyrus, Justin Tranter, and the song producers Kid Harpoon and Tyler Johnson.
"River" reached the top 10 in Croatia, Hungary and Israel  as well as number 32 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 16 on the Billboard Global 200 chart.


Background and development
On December 31, 2022, while hosting her NBC live special Miley's New Year's Eve Party, Cyrus announced the release of the new single "Flowers". Following its January 12, 2023, release, the song experienced widespread critical acclaim, as well as a global commercial success despite minimal promotion. "Flowers" became Cyrus' second number one single in the United States, hitting the top spot on Billboard Hot 100 on chart issue January 28 and staying there for six continuous weeks. A week prior to the lead single's release, the singer unveiled that her next album will be called Endless Summer Vacation with a release date of March 10.
Cyrus stated that "River" had begun as a much sadder song, since its development started within a turbulent time in her life. However, as the result of parts she organized, the track "evolved from a trouble where it felt like it never stopped raining, to then raining down love". The singer added, that in order to take part in the event, [one] needed to  "bring [their] gay best friend". During the interview for Miley Cyrus – Endless Summer Vacation (Backyard Sessions), she admitted that "River" is about ejaculation. However this word was censored, resulting in theories regarding what she actually said. "River" shares the same production team as its previous single "Flowers" – it was produced by Kid Harpoon and Tyler Johnson, with additional writing done by the singer and Justin Tranter.


Composition
"River" is a dance-pop and synth-pop song with elements of new wave, synthwave, post-disco and acid pop, described by Cyrus as a "dancefloor banger". The song features a Roland TB-303 acid line, pulsating synths, and guitars. Clash's Emily Swingle found it to be reminiscent of Cyrus's 2010 album Can't Be Tamed. Andrew Sacher of BrooklynVegan called the track a "retro synthpop banger," adding it would fit on her 2020 album Plastic Hearts. George Griffiths of the Official Charts Company described it as a "new wave-esque" tune, consisting of "wonky" instrumental inspired by 1980s synth-pop and electronic music.  Chris Willman of Variety noted the song for the inclusion of "retro synth sounds" and further found inspiration from the style of Giorgio Moroder. Uproxx's Alex Gonzalez wrote that it follows the "dance-ready theme established by 'Flowers'". Nick Levine of NME felt that it "feels like a relative of her Stevie Nicks-inspired hit 'Midnight Sky'." Alexis Petridis of The Guardian called it an EDM anthem with "an undeniable dancefloor rush," despite its "tendency to flicker between squelchy video game sounds and out of kilter hip hop breaks." Mary Siroky of Consequence called it "the album's disco-inspired centerpiece", likening it to the 2020 albums Future Nostalgia by Dua Lipa and Chromatica by Lady Gaga.
Helen Brown of The Independent described the song as a "straightforward romancer about a paramour who's restored her faith after the love drought." Rolling Stone's Brittany Spanos felt that it is "buzzing with the hope of new love and the end of sexual and romantic droughts."


Release and promotion
On March 7, 2023, Cyrus started teasing "River" through teasers released on her social media. She shared a portion of the song's instrumental, as well as its lyrics. On March 13, 2023, it was officially released to adult contemporary radio and its hot and modern sub-formats in the United States. The song was also sent to contemporary hit radio in the country the following day. A week later, the song impacted rhythmic contemporary radio. It impacted Italian radio airplay on April 20. Cyrus performed "River" live for the first time, in the documentary concert special, Miley Cyrus – Endless Summer Vacation (Backyard Sessions), which was released on Disney+ on March 10, 2023.
"River" commercially failed to achieve similar success as "Flowers", debuting at number 32 on the Billboard Hot 100, charting alongside four other songs from the album. It was backed-up by 13.7 million radio audience impressions, leading to the single's entry on the Radio Songs chart at number 48. On other airplay surveys, it appeared at numbers 26 and 27 on Adult Top 40 and Pop Airplay, respectively, peaking at number 17 on the former and number 20 on the latter. It also debuted on the Hot Dance/Electronic Songs at number two, becoming the highest debut on the chart since "Hold Me Closer" (2022) by Elton John and Britney Spears, as well as Cyrus's highest peaking on the chart yet, surpassing her 2013 collaboration with will.i.am, "Fall Down". It crowned its steaming component chart with 10.9 million streams, while on Dance/Electronic Digital Song Sales "River" entered at number four with 1,600 downloads. Elsewhere, it debuted at numbers 16 and 22 in the UK Singles Chart and ARIA Singles Chart, respectively.


Critical reception
Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine noted the song's "enticing, high-stakes chorus worthy of Cyrus's fierce vocals and personality." Pitchfork's Shaad D'Souza called it one of the best songs on Endless Summer Vacation, adding: "Cyrus effectively showcases who she is at this point in her career: Mature but still messy, not above a theatrical turn of phrase ('You're pourin' down, baby, drown me out') and, very occasionally, still in tune with the big-hearted optimism that characterized her earlier music." David Cobbals of The Line of Best Fit called it a "confused mash of one too many ideas that leave it being more underwhelming than interesting."


Music video
The black-and-white music video for "River" was directed by Jacob Bixenman. On March 7, 2023, Cyrus announced its release date and shared a teaser video. The music video premiered on March 10, 2023. It features Cyrus in a black minidress, dancing under a spotlight on a raised, lit-up platform, joined by a group of shirtless men. Near the end, rain begins to fall. Erica Gonzales of Elle called the video "sleek and sexy", while Billboard's Glenn Rowley called it "moody".


Accolades


Credits and personnel
Credits adapted from Tidal, Pitchfork and the liner notes of Endless Summer Vacation.


Recording
Recorded at Ridgemont High, Los Angeles.
Mixed at Windmill Lane Studios, Dublin.
Mastered at Sterling Sound, Edgewater.


Personnel
Miley Cyrus – vocals, songwriting, executive production
Kid Harpoon – songwriting, production, drums, bass guitar, guitar, synth bass, synthesizer, drum programming, additional vocal
Ivan Jackson – horns
Tyler Johnson – songwriting, drum programming, synth bass, synthesizer, additional vocal
Joe LaPorta – mastering engineering
Brian Rajaratnam – engineering
Mark "Spike" Stent – mixing engineering
Justin Tranter – songwriting
Matt Wolach – assistant engineering


Charts


Certifications


Release history


Notes


References