Title: 2024–25 Diósgyőri VTK season

The 2024–25 season is Diósgyőri VTK's 57th competitive season, 2nd consecutive season in the Nemzeti Bajnokság I and 124th year in existence as a football club. In addition to the domestic league, Diósgyőr participate in this season's editions of the Magyar Kupa.


Kits
Supplier: 2Rule / Sponsor: Tippmix / Hell Energy Drink / Shirt back sponsor: Apollo Tyres / Sleeve sponsor: Borsodi / Volkswagen-Miskolc Autó / Short sponsor: Duna Aszfalt / Borsodi / Tippmix


Kit usage
We indicate in parentheses the number of round.
Source:

DEB: Debrecen; FEH: Fehérvár; FER: Ferencváros; GYO: Győr; KAZ: Kazincbarcika; KEC: Kecskemét; MTK: MTK Budapest; NYI: Nyíregyháza; PAK: Paks; PUS: Puskás Akadémia; UJP: Újpest; ZAL: Zalaegerszeg;
R64: Round of 64; R32: Round of 32;


First team squad
As of 13 February 2025

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.


Transfers


Summer

Sources:


Winter

Sources:


Out on loan

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.

Sources:


Contract extension

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.

Sources:


Non-playing staff


Board of directors


Management
As of 26 February 2025


Managerial changes

c = caretaker


Friendlies
  Win
  Draw
  Loss
  Fixtures


Pre-season

Source:


In-season
Winter training camp in Spain, between 12–24 January 2025.

Sources:


Competitions


Overall record
In italics, we indicate the Last match and the Final position achieved in competition(s) that have not yet been completed.


Nemzeti Bajnokság I


League table


Results summary


Results by round


Matches
  Win
  Draw
  Loss
  Postponed 

Source:


Results overview
All results are indicated from the perspective of Diósgyőri VTK.
We indicate in parentheses the number of round.
  Win
  Draw
  Loss
  Postponed 


Magyar Kupa


Round of 64

The draw for the Round of 64 was held on 26 August 2024. Kazincbarcika also started the Magyar Kupa competitions in this round.


Round of 32

The draw for the Round of 64 was held on 16 September 2024. In the draw Diósgyőr got Fehérvár as their opponent, who play also in NB I. Fehérvár also started the Magyar Kupa competitions in Round of 64, they matched Monor (NB III) away and the result was 2–0.


Squad statistics
As of match played 30 March 2025


Appearances
Includes all competitions for senior teams.
We indicate the number of the player's appearances as substitute by the combination of a plus sign and a figure.
We indicate with  gold  color the maximum appearances only in the competition in which the team has already played at least 2 matches.

Notes: GK: goalkeeper; DF: defender; MF: midfielder; FW: forward


Goal scorers
Includes all competitions for senior teams. The list is sorted by squad number when season-total goals are equal. Players with no goals not included in the list.
We indicate in parentheses how many of the goals scored by the player from penalties.


Penalties


Own goals


Assists
Includes all competitions for senior teams. The list is sorted by squad number when season-total assists are equal. Players with no assists not included in the list.


Goalkeepers


Clean sheets
Includes all competitions for senior teams. The list is sorted by squad number when season-total clean sheets are equal. Numbers in parentheses represent games where both goalkeepers participated and both kept a clean sheet; the number in parentheses is awarded to the goalkeeper who was substituted on, whilst a full clean sheet is awarded to the goalkeeper who was on the field at the start of play.
We indicate in parentheses how many of the goals scored from penalties.


Penalties saving


Disciplinary record
Includes all competitions for senior teams. The list is sorted by red cards, then yellow cards (and by squad number when total cards are equal). Players with no cards not included in the list.


Suspensions


Injuries


Captains
Includes all competitions for senior teams. The list is sorted by squad number when season-total number of games where a player started as captain are equal. Players with no games started as captain not included in the list.


Attendances
The table contains the number of attendances of Diósgyőri VTK domestic matches.
Clicking on the competitions leads to the number of spectators for all the matches of the competitions.
The  gold  indicates the highest attendances, and the lowest attendances with  pink .
Home stadium: Diósgyőri Stadion, Miskolc – Capacity: 15,325


Awards and nominations


Yearly awards


Rangadó Award Ceremony (Rangadó Gála)


Monthly awards
Player of the Month, Coach of the Month, Most beautiful goal of the Month and Most beautiful saving of the Month by MLSZ (Hungarian Football Federation) and M4 Sport TV of Nemzeti Bajnokság.


Weekly awards


Selection of the Round
Selection of the Round of Nemzeti Bajnokság by M4 Sport TV, Nemzeti Sport, Csakfoci and Sofascore websites and Player of the Week (POW) by Nemzeti Sport.

(s) Substitute


Goal of the Round
Goal of the Round of Nemzeti Bajnokság by the M4 Sport website.


Goal of the Round
Goal of the Round of Nemzeti Bajnokság by the M4 Sport website.


Milestones

Debuts
The following players made their competitive debuts for Diósgyőri VTK's first team during the campaign.

50th appearances
The following players made their 50th appearances for Diósgyőri VTK's first team during the campaign.

100th appearances
The following players made their 100th appearances for Diósgyőri VTK's first team during the campaign.

First goals
The following players scored their first goals for Diósgyőri VTK's first team during the campaign.


Notes


References


External links
Diósgyőri VTK Official Website
Soccerway
Worldfootball 2024/25 fixtures and results