Title: Vihti

Vihti (Finnish pronunciation: [ˈʋiht̪i]; Swedish: Vichtis) is a municipality in Finland, located in the southern interior of the country. Vihti is situated in the Uusimaa region. The population of Vihti is approximately 29,000. It is the 37th most populous municipality in Finland. Vihti is part of the Helsinki metropolitan area, which has approximately 1.62 million inhabitants. 
Vihti is located approximately 50 kilometres (30 mi) northwest of the capital city of Helsinki. Vihti has an area of 567.06 square kilometres (218.94 sq mi) of which 45.02 km2 (17.38 sq mi) is water. The population density is 55.29 inhabitants per square kilometre (143.2/sq mi). Its seat is Nummela, which is the most populated urban area in the municipality.
Vihti's neighbouring municipalities are, clockwise from the north, Karkkila, Loppi, Hyvinkää, Nurmijärvi, Espoo, Kirkkonummi, Siuntio and Lohja. There are several important road connections through Vihti, the most notable being the Pori Highway between Pori and Helsinki, the Hanko Highway between Hanko and Hyvinkää, and the Vihti Road between Vihti and Helsinki. The largest lake in Vihti is Lake Hiidenvesi, which is connected to the Gulf of Finland by Lake Lohja and the Karis River.


History
The oldest literal mark of Vihti is from the 15th century. The old parish church, St. Bridget's Church, was also built during this time. After the deterioration of the old church, a new current church was built in Vihti and was completed in 1772.


Politics
Results of the 2019 Finnish parliamentary election in Vihti:

Finns Party   20%
Social Democratic Party   18%
National Coalition Party   17.9%
Centre Party   14.2%
Green League   10.1%
Movement Now   5.2%
Left Alliance   4.8%
Christian Democrats   3.4%
Swedish People's Party   2.4%
Other parties   3.8%


Economy
The electronics contract manufacturer DICRO Oy is one of its main employers, along with the local forestry companies and farmers.


Villages
Haimoo, Härkälä, Jokikunta, Oinasjoki, Ojakkala, Palajärvi, Siippoo, Tervalampi, Haapkylä, Huhmari, Hulttila, Hynnölä, Härtsilä, Irjala, Jokikunta, Jättölä, Kaharla, Kaukola, Kauppila, Kirkonkylä, Kirvelä, Koikkala, Korkaniemi, Korppila, Kourla, Köykkälä, Lahnus, Lahti, Lankila, Leppärlä, Lusila, Maikkala, Merramäki, Niemenkylä, Niemi, Niuhala, Nummela, Olkkala, Ollila, Otalampi, Oravala, Pakasela, Pietilä, Pääkslahti, Ruskela, Salmi, Selki, Suksela, Suontaka, Taipale, Tarttila, Torhola, Tuohilampi, Vanhala, Vanjoki, Vanjärvi, Vesikansa, Vihti, Vihtijärvi, Vähäkylä


Climate


Sights
Vihti Church, an 18th century lutheran church
St. Bridget's Church, a medieval church ruin
Vihti Museum, history museum showcasing local history of the municipality
Lake Hiidenvesi, one of the largest lakes of the Uusimaa region


Friendship cities
 Fukui Prefecture, Japan (since 1980)


References


External links
 Media related to Vihti at Wikimedia Commons
 Vihti travel guide from Wikivoyage
Municipality of Vihti – Official website (in Finnish)
Vihti constructive debate Vihdin Keskustelualueet