Title: Widya Mandala Catholic University

Widya Mandala Catholic University (Indonesian: Universitas Katolik Widya Mandala) commonly abbreviated as WMCU or UKWM, is a major private Roman Catholic university in Indonesia, located in the heart of Darmo District in Surabaya, East Java - Indonesia.
Widya Mandala Catholic University is known for Accounting, Food Technology, Chemical Engineering, Pharmacy, Management, and the Doctoral (Ph.D) program in Management. The university is owned by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Surabaya and is being managed by the Diocese under the Widya Mandala Foundation.


History

The idea of establishing a Catholic Higher Education Foundation started around 1914-1919. At that time, many HBS (Hogere Burger School) graduates were unable to continue their higher education to the Netherlands, due to circumstances regarding the first world war and the resultant transportation barriers to Europe.
During the 1950s, in what became known as the "Catholic College Awakening Era" after the establishment of several Catholic universities in Indonesian cities, Mgr. J. Klooster, CM as the Bishop of Surabaya founded the Widya Mandala Foundation.
Widya Mandala comes from the ancient Javanese language; Mandala means building or place in the sense not only physical and Widya means scholar. So Widya Mandala can be interpreted as a place of education for wise and successful people (scholars). Some people also simplify the meaning of Widya Mandala as a place or container of knowledge.
September 20, 1960 was designated as the anniversary of Widya Mandala Catholic University Surabaya (UKWMS). When it was founded, UKWMS was located at Jalan Dr. Soetomo, Surabaya. Now there are ten faculties, postgraduate programs (S2 and S3), as well as a Secretarial Academy (D3). The activities of the Widya Mandala Catholic University in Surabaya are outlined in the form of the Tri Dharma of Higher Education which consists of Education and Teaching, Research, and Community Service.
As one of the oldest private universities in Surabaya, UKWMS has four campus buildings to support the teaching and learning process. The main campus is located on Jalan Dinoyo 42, inhabited by the Business Faculty, the Communication Science Faculty and the Agricultural Technology Faculty. The second campus is located on Jalan Kalijudan 38, inhabited by the Faculty of Engineering and the Faculty of Teacher Training & Education. The third campus is located on Jalan Dinoyo 48, inhabited by the Postgraduate Program. The newest campus building which was inaugurated in 2013 is the Integrated and Comprehensive Health Sciences Campus and is located on Jalan Kalisari Selatan 7 in the Pakuwon City complex. Carrying integrated learning methods across health sciences, on this fourth campus there are the Faculty of Pharmacy, the Faculty of Psychology, the Faculty of Nursing, the Faculty of Philosophy, and the Faculty of Medicine.


Locations
Widya Mandala Catholic University has four campuses in the city of Surabaya and one in Madiun, Indonesia.

The first campus in Dinoyo hosts the Faculty of Business, Faculty of Entrepreneurship, Faculty of Agricultural Technology, Faculty of Arts in Communication, and the Secretary Academy (Office Administration).
The second campus in Kalijudan is also equipped with sports facilities such as basketball and tennis courts. The Kalijudan campus hosts the Faculty of Engineering, and the Faculty of Teaching and Education.
The third campus in Pakuwon City was established in 2013. It is located in a residential complex that is projected to be an independent city in the East Surabaya area. The campus at Pakuwon City Laguna was built with the concept of an Integrated Health Sciences Campus, which includes mental and physical health. Pakuwon campus hosts the Faculty of Medicine, Faculty of Pharmacy, Faculty of Nursing, Faculty of Psychology, and Faculty of Philosophy in one integrated campus.
The Graha Widya Mandala campus, located in the same location as the Dinoyo Campus, is equipped with complete facilities and is convenient for use by the Widya Mandala Secretarial Academy. Graha Widya Mandala campus offers a Master Program in Management, a Master Program in Accounting, a Master Program in English Education, a Ph.D Program in Management, and a Language Institute.
The campus in Madiun is an integration of Widya Mandala Madiun Catholic University in Madiun City. Madiun campus hosts the Programs outside the main campus (Study Program Outside the Main Campus (PSKDU)), such Guidance and Counseling, Indonesian Language Education, Mathematics Education, English Literature, Biology, Industrial Engineering, Management, Accounting, Psychology, and Diploma (D-III) in Pharmacy.


Faculties and departments
Diplomas (D-III) (Faculty of Vocational):

Diploma Program (D-III) in Accounting
Diploma Program (D-III) Secretary Academy (Office Administration)
UnderGraduates:

Faculty of Business (Member of AACSB International)
Department of Accounting
Department of Management
International Business Management (IBM) Program
IBM Solbridge Joint Degree with the SolBridge International School of Business
International Business Accounting (IBAcc) Program
Digital Business Management (DBM) Program
Faculty of Teaching and Education
Department of Physics Education
Department of English Education
Department of Childhood Education Studies
Faculty of Pharmacy
Department of Pharmacy
Department of "Apoteker" Pharmacist (Apt.) specialization degree
Faculty of Engineering
Department of Chemical Engineering
Department of Double Degree of Chemical Engineering is double-degree program with the National Taiwan University of Science and Technology
Department of Electrical Engineering
Department of Industrial Engineering
Faculty of Agricultural Technology
Department of Food Technology
Faculty of Medicine
Department of Medicine with a Medical Doctor (dr.) specialization degree
Department of Doctor Profession
Faculty of Psychology
Department of Psychology
Faculty of Nursing
Department of Nursing
Department of Ners (Ns.) specialization degree
Faculty of Arts in Communication
Department of Communication Sciences
Faculty of Philosophy
Department of Philosophy
Faculty of Entrepreneurship
Department of Entrepreneurship
PostGraduates:

Master Program in Management
Master Program in Accounting
Master Program in English Education
Master Program in Chemical Engineering
Ph.D Program in Management


Gallery


See also

Association of Christian Universities and Colleges in Asia (ACUCA)


References


External links
 Media related to Widya Mandala Catholic University, Surabaya at Wikimedia Commons