Title: Sean Rhyan

Sean Michael Rhyan (born September 15, 2000) is an American professional football guard for the Green Bay Packers of the National Football League (NFL). He played college football for the UCLA Bruins.


Early life
Rhyan was born on September 15, 2000, in Laguna Hills, California, to a Filipino mother who immigrated to Walnut, California, from the Philippines at age five, and an American father. He grew up in Ladera Ranch, California, and primarily played baseball and rugby during his youth. Rhyan didn’t watch the NFL growing up or play football until high school, as rugby was his main passion and sport. 
Rhyan attended Capistrano Valley Christian School before transferring to San Juan Hills High School in San Juan Capistrano, California, after his freshman year. As a senior, he was named Male Athlete of the Year by the Orange County Register and played in the 2019 All-American Bowl. Rhyan also won the CIF Southern Section Division 1 title in shot put. He committed to play college football at UCLA, choosing them over offers from Notre Dame, Alabama, and most schools within the Pac-12 Conference.


College career
Rhyan was named a starter at offensive tackle for the Bruins going into his freshman season. He started all 12 of UCLA's games and was named a Freshman All-American by the Football Writers Association of America and USA Today. Rhyan started all seven of the Bruins games in the team's COVID-19-shortened 2020 season.


Professional career

Rhyan was selected by the Green Bay Packers in the third round (92nd overall) of the 2022 NFL draft. He signed his rookie contract on May 6, 2022. He saw his first NFL action on November 6, 2022, playing a single special teams snap in a Week 9 loss to the Detroit Lions. On November 25, Rhyan was suspended six games for violating the league's substance abuse policy, effectively ending his season. He appeared in 12 games in the 2023 season. He started in all 17 games in the 2024 season.


References


External links
Green Bay Packers bio
UCLA Bruins bio